The President:
As we continue to recover from an historic economic crisis,
it's clear to everyone that
one of its major causes was a
breakdown in oversight that led
to widespread abuses in the
financial system.
An epidemic of irresponsibility
took hold from Wall Street to
Washington to Main Street.
And the consequences
have been disastrous.
Millions of Americans have
seen their life savings erode;
families have been
devastated by job losses;
businesses large and small
have closed their doors.
In response, this week, my
administration proposed a set of
major reforms to the rules that
govern our financial system;
to attack the causes of this
crisis and to prevent future
crises from taking place; to
ensure that our markets can work
fairly and freely for
businesses and consumers alike.
We're going to promote markets
that work for those who play by the rules.
We're going to stand up for a
system in which fair dealing and
honest competition are
the only way to win.
We're going to level the
playing field for consumers.
And we're going to have the
kinds of rules that encourage
innovations that make
our economy stronger --
not those that allow insiders to exploit its weaknesses for their own gain.
And one of the most important
proposals is a new oversight
agency called the Consumer
Financial Protection Agency.
It's charged with just one job:
looking out for the interests of
ordinary Americans in
the financial system.
This is essential, for this
crisis may have started on Wall Street.
But its impacts have been felt
by ordinary Americans who rely
on credit cards, home loans, and
other financial instruments.
It's true that this crisis was
caused in part by Americans who
took on too much debt and took
out loans they simply could not afford.
But there are also millions of
Americans who signed contracts
they didn't always understand
offered by lenders who didn't
always tell the truth.
Today, folks signing up for
a mortgage, student loan,
or credit card face a
bewildering array of
incomprehensible options.
Companies compete not by
offering better products,
but more complicated ones --
with more fine print and hidden terms.
It's no coincidence that
the lack of strong consumer
protections led to abuses
against consumers;
the lack of rules to stop
deceptive lending practices led
to abuses against borrowers.
This new agency will have the
responsibility to change that.
It will have the power to
set tough new rules so that
companies compete by offering
innovative products that
consumers actually want --
and actually understand.
Those ridiculous contracts --
pages of fine print that no one
can figure out -- will
be a thing of the past.
You'll be able to
compare products --
with descriptions
in plain language --
to see what is best for you.
The most unfair
practices will be banned.
And the rules will be enforced.
Now, some argue
that these changes --
and the many others we've
called for -- go too far.
I welcome a debate about how we can make sure our regulations
work for businesses
and consumers.
But what I will not accept --
what I will vigorously oppose --
are those who do not
argue in good faith.
Those who would defend the
status quo at any cost.
Those who put their narrow
interests ahead of the interests
of ordinary Americans.
We've already begun to see
special interests mobilizing
against change.
And that's not surprising.
That's Washington.
For these are interests that
have benefited from a system
which allow ordinary
Americans to be exploited.
These interests argue against
reform even as millions of
people are facing the
consequences of this crisis in
their own lives.
These interests defend
business-as-usual even though we
know that it was
business-as-usual that allowed
this crisis to take place.
Well, the American people did
not send me to Washington to
give in to those
special interests;
the American people sent me to
Washington to stand up for their interests.
And while I'm not spoiling for
a fight, I'm ready for one.
The most important thing we
can do to put this era of
irresponsibility in the past
is to take responsibility now.
That's why my administration will accept no less than real
and lasting change to the
way business is done --
on Wall Street
and in Washington.
We will do what is necessary
to end this crisis --
and we will do what it takes to prevent this kind of crisis from
ever happening again.
Thank you.